Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host as always, Ricardo Lopes and
today I'm joined by Doctor Olivia Riley. She's a
postdoctoral fellow in the ACT lab at Harvard University.
She studies social cognition in non-human primates. And she
uses a comparative approach to investigate the neural and
hormonal correlates of social cognition and behavior. And today
we're focusing on social cognition and primates, and we're
going to talk a little bit about things like
oxytocin, sex differences in the brain of capuchin monkeys
and comparing them to humans and some other related
topics. So, Doctor Riley, welcome to the show. It's
a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you so much and thank you for having
me.
So, uh, to start off with, tell us a
little bit about how you got interested, how and
why you got interested in studying social cognition and
primates. I mean, why primates specifically, is there something
special about them or is this just a personal
interest of yours?
I guess the best answer for me would be
both, um, primates have always been especially interesting to
me, um, but also one of the reasons I
think that primates, nonhuman primates are particularly important to
study um social cognitive questions is because, um, primates
are, you know, Closely related to humans on a
phylogenetic scale, and so we can learn a lot
about humans by studying non-human primates, um, especially what
it really is that separates humans from other primates,
um, because we're primates too, and so, and we
know that humans are, are. Very different, but the
more you learn about other nonhuman primates, the more
you realize that there are actually quite a lot
of similarities between humans and other primates as well.
Um, SO that was, yeah, I would say that
my best answer is it was a little bit
of both. It was personal interest, but also they're
a great model for answering that sort of question.
And what are the aspects of social cognition in
primates that you are most interested in and you
explore the most in your work?
Yeah, that's a great question because there are a
lot of different directions that people have gone studying
social cognition in general. Um, SO for me, I
I thought that it was interesting to study these
social questions because there are certain cognitive skills or
abilities that help a social animal to sort of
navigate its social environment, um, and a lot of
primates live in complex social environments, particularly humans, um.
So there are certain skills that I think can
help aid the primate in this sort of social
experience, um, so some examples of that sort of
question. That people have studied would be like looking
into how other primate species might be able to
recognize other individuals' faces, so they're conspecifics, their group
members, for instance, um, or how maybe they can
differentiate different facial expressions that are directed towards them
um in a group setting, or maybe they're capable
of following another individuals gaze, um. To gain information
about what that individual may be looking at or
um yeah, I don't know, different ideas like that,
but for me, uh, most recently I investigated attention,
so looking at um attention biases toward socially threatening
facial expressions. So, um, in, in my experience, I
was working primarily with capuchin monkeys, um, and Capuchin
monkeys are a neotropical primate. About the size of
a house cat, um, so not too big, but
they're very cute, but they are also wild animals,
so they're definitely not pets, um, but they, I
was interested in knowing whether they show an attentional
bias toward faces that have a threatening expression, so
a photo of an uh capuchin face that might
If they were just interacting with their group mates,
um, and one of their groupmates, you know, threatened
them or got angry at them, um, would they
pay more attention to a face like that that
was potentially threatening compared to a face that was
neutral, um, posed no threat in theory, um, and
I was interested in that because in humans we
know that We tend to show these biases toward
um negativity, so whether that's um a negative social
expression on another human being's face or, um, you
know, a threatening object, for instance, um. Maybe a
picture of a snake versus a flower. We're a
lot quicker to focus our attention on that negative
item, and so I was curious whether capuchins also
show that kind of bias because if you think
about it, there is actually some evolutionary benefit to
being able to pay rapid attention to something that's
potentially posing as a threat because it allows you
to react appropriately, um. But, uh, surprisingly, we didn't
actually find that capuchins show a robust attentional bias
toward threatening faces in the way that we sometimes
see in other species. So, um, yeah, but that
was one of my most recent examples of uh
cognitive tasks that involves some social stimuli.
So sticking with capuchin monkeys, then I know that
one of the things that you've studied has to
do with their affiliated behaviors and related to that,
uh, how it correlates with oxytocin levels. So, to
start off with in this section, so how does
oxytocin work? What kinds of affiliate Behavior is it
associated with? Because, you know, nowadays, we hear a
lot about hormones on, uh, I mean, everywhere, basically.
And sometimes people have very, uh, very reductive and,
uh, oversimplistic ideas about how, how hormones work, particularly
in the brain. So, in this case, uh, tell
us a little bit about oxytocin.
Yeah, definitely. Um, SO oxytocin is a neuropeptide hormone,
um, so it's a chemical messenger essentially in the
body, and what people typically think of when they
hear about oxytocin is its involvement in social social
attachment, social bonding formation, um. Uh, ORIGINALLY we learned
about oxytocin in the context of mother infant bonding,
um, parental bonding, uh, oxytocin is heavily involved in,
um, you know, like pregnancy, birth, um, lactation. Um,
BUT we also know now that oxytocin is also
related to affiliative behaviors and group cohesion maintenance, um,
general cooperation outside of reproductive concept, um, context as
well, um, and so it's a really interesting hormone
because, um, it, it is, it does seem to
be involved in a lot of these other, um,
generally positive like pro-social contexts, um, particularly. For sort
of increasing that type of behavior, though we also
are now realizing that oxytocin, that sounds really great
and awesome, is not just this like wonder hormone
that it can't solve every problem. Um, THERE'S been
evidence that increases in oxytocin are also associated with
increases in um Uh, like distrust in an outgroup,
for instance, like, so we might have more in-group
cohesion, but the effects of that would be, um,
sort of like the opposite effects on it, the
outgroup. So there's, it's not this perfect hormone, but
um it is a really interesting. HORMONE and there's
definitely a lot to learn about it, but overall,
um, oxytocin generally when we think of oxytocin, we
think of social affiliation, social attachment, social bonding, um,
general social behaviors, yeah.
So when it comes to the in-group, out-group dynamics
aspect, it can uh lead to in-group cohesion, but
that can translate at least in certain contexts into
violence toward uh outgroups, for example.
Yeah, and like you said, it's all very context
specific, so, um, you know, increasing oxytocin in one
circumstance will not have the same effect as in
another circumstance, um, but you're right, there's been some
examples that There have been different effects of oxytocin
in the context of in-group versus outgroup.
Mhm. Yeah, I mean, the, the context here, I
guess it's one of the most important aspects of
how hormones or the effects, the specific effects that
hormones have because they vary a lot depending on
the context. And for example, oxytocin, it's one of
those hormones that Uh, popularly he's known at least
in certain books, for example, as the love hormone,
but, and what, what people usually mean by love
in that case is romantic love, but I mean,
it's uh very much uh uh I mean, it's
effects are much broader than that.
Yes, absolutely. And that's exactly right. It is not
just this love hormone, even though that's maybe what
we know it best for. Um, THERE'S another side
to oxytocin as well.
So, in the case of capuchin monkeys specifically, uh,
how does it manifest in terms of their affiliated
behaviors? For example, I know that you've studied fur
rubbing behavior and how it relates to oxytocin. So
tell us a little bit about that.
Yeah, um, so my colleagues and I were able
to investigate how this species typical behavior called fur
rubbing impacts urinary oxytocin and capuchin monkeys. So, um,
let me just briefly explain what fur rubbing is,
um. So capuchin monkeys in the wild and also
in captivity, um, when they have access to certain
items, which in our case um was onions, but
anything that's sort of like in the allium family
or um sometimes they've been seen to do it
with peppers, uh, insects on occasion, capuchins will essentially
take the item and they'll kind of like break
it up and rub it like all over their
bodies and And while they're rubbing it on their
bodies, they kind of get up to their partners
and start rubbing all over their partners while their
partners are rubbing the object on their bodies. And
so you kind of just get this frenzied pile
of capuchin monkeys that are all like excitedly rubbing
their fur on each other. Um, SO that's what
we're talking about when we talk about fur rubbing.
And so, um, what we investigated was whether this
fur rubbing behavior, which You know, upon observation brings
a lot of the monkeys together in closer proximity
in contact, um, you know, they are all around
each other. We thought maybe there was a possibility
that this behavior is somehow related to oxytocin. Maybe
oxytocin levels are changing when they engage in this
behavior, um, so we did look at how fur
rubbing impacted urinary oxytocin levels in the monkeys, um.
And we also know for instance that so grooming
behavior, which is another um important social behavior in
many primate species, but especially capuchin monkeys, um. Grooming
increases urinary oxytocin levels in capuchins, and so um
we were able to evaluate how Grooming behavior compared
to fur rubbing behavior, um compared to control, and
we did find that there were increases in oxytocin
um after fur rubbing bouts, and we found differences
um looking across a 60 minute time frame, we
saw increases starting at the 15 minute time point,
um, and these differences were above baseline and similar
to what we see after bout of grooming.
Mhm. Uh, AND so, let me get now into
another topic, then another one that I mentioned in
the introduction. Uh, YOU'VE also studied sex differences in
the brains of capuchin monkeys. So, what did you
find there? And then we can perhaps expand to
see how it might relate at least to a
certain extent to differences in the brains of humans,
but let's start with capuchin monkeys.
Yeah, sure, um, yeah, so we, we did look
at capuchin monkeys, um, and how there are we
did find some sex differences in the capuchin monkey
brain. We thought there might be because we know
that there are certain behavioral differences in capuchin monkeys,
so, um, just for a little bit of background,
we capuchin monkeys are um a group living primate,
so they live in these social groups in the
wild, and the ones that were um a part
of this study also lived in social groups, um,
like how they went in the wild. And um,
Females tend to have these strong social relationships with
kin, but they'll also form relationships with non-kin. um,
MALES will too, but females also show. These um
other uh important behaviors for social cognition, which would
be, um, they exhibit all nursing behaviors, they will
cooperate with other group members, um, they will, females
will aid in infant rearing together, um, so they
have this very cooperative. Um, WE could characterize their
social niche as being a very cooperative one. MALES
do have friends too, but they also engage in
more, um, like aggressive territory defense behaviors, and none
of this is like totally black and white. There
are females that will do this too, but males
do so more. They're the primary defenders of their
group typically in the wild, um. And males we
know also undergo what we refer to as a
secondary puberty. So during this time period they will
grow like a wider, their faces will widen, their
body mass increases, they'll show increases in testosterone level.
Um, MALES, when they reach puberty will leave their
social groups in the wild, whereas females are the
ones that stay in their social groups. So we
do see these sort of differences between the sexes,
um, in general, and so we thought that perhaps
we would see these differences reflected in the brain.
Um, WE also know that capuchins are unique and
interesting because even though they are not an ape,
they share, they converge with humans and other apes
on certain things. So for instance, they have a
large brain to body size ratio. Which basically means
they have big heads for their bodies, um, and
that's something that we typically use as an index
of or a measure of cognitive ability, and so,
um, that's an important feature that they share with
humans and with other ages. They are pretty cooperative.
They're prosocial species that's um unusually tolerant when we
consider that they have social hierarchies in their groups,
so there's typically Um, an alpha male, and alpha
female, and then several individuals of varying ranks beneath
them, so they're not quite as linear in their
hierarchy as say Rhesus macaques are, but they still
shared, um, they still have this hierarchy in their
social groups. So, um, given all of that. We
looked for differences in their brains, so, um, for
your viewers who may not be as familiar with
neuroscience in general, we um we're looking at gray
matter, which the brain is made up of gray
matter and white matter. Gray matter is the area
of the brain that actually does look a little
more gray if you're looking at an MRI scan,
but That's basically the cell bodies, um, where most
of those are, and then in the white matter
you have um like the axons, um, the myelinated
axons from the cell bodies, and so we looked
at both, so we started looking at gray matter
volume, and we did find that there were differences
between males and females, so. What's interesting is that
males showed expansion in the region of the hypothalamus,
and the hypothalamus is a part of the brain
that is um responsible for a lot of the
more um what we think of as instinctual behaviors,
so like, um. Territory defense, reproduction, that sort of
behavior, and then females we we saw expansion in
areas that are typically considered to be more like
higher order areas. So, um, areas associated with like
visual processing, um, social attention um or social processing
and attention, I should say, um, and then we
also looked at white matter differences in white matter.
Um, SO we looked at specifically, um, differences in
fractional anisotropy. So fractional anisotropy refers to, um, differences
in the directionality of water diffusion across white matter
microstructure, um. And so we saw that there were
differences um such that females had higher fractional anisotropy
than males in um several regions that sort of
spanned the motor cortex, premotor cortex, and the somatosensory
cortex, um, and these areas also projected to areas
that are similarly involved in some of those higher
order, um, those higher order regions that I mentioned
before, so. You asked how this is different from
what we see in humans, um, so one of
the most interesting things that we found in these
sex differences is that the ranges in which they
occurred were completely no overlapping. Um, SO this is
actually pretty similar to what has been found in
rodents. So, um, we know that rodents show these
non-overlapping ranges ranges in sex differences, but In rodents,
these differences typically happen more in the areas that
are associated with that those ancestral um regions that
are responsible for the more instinctual behaviors, so like
they're reproductive in the territory defense, whereas in the
capuchins, we saw these differences in the higher order
regions in addition to the hypothalamus, but um. And
they were also completely not overlapping, but in humans,
the difference is that we see much more overlap,
so it's very, um, the human brain sex differences
occur on much more of a continuum. There's not,
you can't look at a human brain scan and
know for sure if that's a male or female
just by looking at it, um, because humans are
are much more um. It's so it's much more
overlap in human sex differences, but the interesting thing
is that we do see sex differences in the
capuchin brain in these higher order areas. Where there's
no overlap or um no overlapping ranges where we
do see overlap in humans. um SO that so
that was interesting and we uh you know what
the study was really interesting, but we can't for
sure know why we saw these differences because this
was not we were not able to determine causality
with this study, um, so we can postulate why
we see these differences, but ultimately we're not sure,
um. One thought is that there are um differences
in the socioecology or like the life experiences that
capuchin monkeys have. So when you think about capuchin
monkeys in comparison to humans, for instance, um capuchin
males and females have much more um differentiated. Social
niches between males and females, sort of like I
was describing before and so we suspect that there
are different socioecologies in combination, say with their um
they have a prolonged developmental history, so or I'm
sorry, developmental um period just like humans do, but
um humans actually have even a longer developmental period,
um. So we think that these factors may contribute
to the sex differences that we saw, um, but
again it's, it's, we can't know for sure just
based on this type of study that we did,
um, we can only postulate, but it's definitely interesting,
um, and I think it's important that we sort
of look more into sex differences and other primate
species to see how these differences that we found
may or may not be reflected in other species
that are more or less closely related to humans
on a phylogenetic scale.
So, I have a few questions, follow-up questions to
ask you about that. So, first of all, uh,
in terms of our phylogenetic relationship to capuchin monkeys,
how close or far are we from them? I
mean, basically, what I'm trying to ask you is
phylogenetically speaking, how much can we expect to find
similarities between us and capuchin monkeys specifically?
That's a good question, and I guess it's all
relative, but we of course are most closely related
to the apes because we most recently shared a
common ancestor with apes, and then after the apes
we have um The species of monkeys like the
rhesus macaque monkeys, for instance, and then the neotropical
primates would come after them, and I should have
an exact year to tell you a range of
how many thousands of years ago that common ancestor
existed, but I don't remember off the top of
my head. Um, SO capuchins are farther back, but
not the most far back, um, when we're talking
about an evolutionary scale. And they don't have the
exact year for you.
No, no, that's OK. I mean, I know that
evolutionarily speaking, there's lots of different dates and it's
also not extremely precise, so
yeah. Yeah, that's true, but many, many thousands of
years ago.
And so, I mean, it's interesting that you mentioned,
uh, one of the hypotheses on the table, at
least according to you and your colleagues for to
explaining these differences that we find between male and
female capuchin monkeys in their brains has to do
with, uh, socio-ecological uh factors. The This is very
interesting because many times, and, uh, of course, talking
about sex differences and particularly when we try to
extrapolate to humans is a very contentious topic to
say the least. But, uh, and, uh, at least
to some extent for good reason, because even in
other animals, other primates in this particular case. I
mean, just by finding differences between males and females
in their brains, that doesn't necessarily imply that they
are innate.
Right. Right, yeah, exactly. Um, YEAH, we just because
we found these differences does not mean they're innate.
In fact, uh, it could be that there are
differences in the capuchin brain because, um, perhaps they
So there's a couple, there's a couple possibilities. Um,
ONE is that couchins could have these differences because
they reside in these different ecological social niches. Um,
ANOTHER possibility is that The sex differences may exist
as a way to sort of um we'll say
equalize the differences that may be occurring, um, and
so. To sort of like make these differences less
drastic, um, it's their brains may be it may
be like more of a compensatory effect, um, but,
but again, yeah, a lot of this it it's
really hard to know for sure because we were
not able to control for. THAT we were not
able to figure out this from like what caused
these differences. Um, I'm not sure that we ever
will truly be able to figure it out just
because in order to do that there, I don't
know how you would be able to ethically do
that in a study, uh, noninvasively whatnot, but um.
Yeah, so it just because we found these differences
does not mean that they were innate, um, or
it could be maybe there's a mix like there
could be some areas that are innately different and
then they become less different with uh their lived
experience or they become more different with their lived
experience. I mean, Of course capuchins are a more
extreme example than humans because males and females do
inhabit different niches. I would argue more so than
humans, um, but humans also have more complex social
and cultural experiences than capuchin monkeys do, um, much
more complex, I would argue, and we have much
larger social groups and so. In some ways capuchins
are more extreme in their differences, but in other
ways, humans are more extreme in our lived experiences
and so that, but, you know, so I, I
don't want to extrapolate too much to humans because
humans are a far more complex model. Uh, I
don't think this is just a a black and
white issue for human sex differences. I think there
that's a very complex issue and I think there's
a lot that historically we have. MISATTRIBUTED to um
I think, I think sex differences in humans, it's
just not as simple as as we may think.
I think there's probably a lot more contributing to
that than what we see in the capuchin monkeys.
No, and that was exactly one of the points
that I was trying to get at that, uh,
I mean, when I asked you about phylogenetics, how
much we can compare, in this case, capuchin monkeys,
but it could be any other primate to humans,
uh, and also other factors that might play a
role that I would imagine, of course. THAT in
humans, we have a more complex culture and there
are more cultural factors that we have to take
into account to really understand where sex differences in
the brain behaviorally and in some other domains, uh,
where they stem from exactly. So, uh, yeah, basically,
I mean, even in other animals, in other animal
models, it's not just because we find these differences
that many times are statistical differences, average differences between
males and females that They are necessarily inborn differences
and that we can immediately extrapolate from any animal
model to humans because there's lots of uh preps.
I mean, not only Uh, you have evolved differences
because there's also something separating us even from chimpanzees
and bonobos, but also, uh, socio-ecological, cultural differences and,
and so on,
right? Yeah, absolutely, and um. Yeah, there's a lot
of factors that I imagine are contributing, and we
also know that um humans have very plastic brains,
so our brains are very uh they have ability
to respond to the environment, but, um, like you
said, We experience we all have very complex lives
as humans, um, and I'm not saying that other
primates don't experience complex lives because actually in my
opinion what makes Capuchin's a great model is that
they do live in these complex social groups. They
do need to keep track of their other social
group members who's higher ranking and who maybe we
want to avoid around food, who's lower ranking, who's
kin, who's non kin, so there's there are these
important social. Pieces of knowledge that capuchins need to
be able to keep track of and similarly with
other apes as well, but Like you mentioned, there
are many thousands of years dividing humans from capuchins,
um, and and and even with the apes as
well. So it's important to keep in mind that
just because in and this is just in general
in science, when we find a result that exists
in a primate or even a rodent, it doesn't
always mean it will directly translate to humans, um.
And uh Yeah, I, I think that's a, that's
a really important point to consider is that, um,
We're we're working on finding answers, but it's not
always an easy simple answer, and we also have
to keep in mind that in this study we
had um a small sample size and so before
we can go drawing really concrete conclusions, it would
be important for other people to sort of add
to this body of work, to increase sample size,
um. And so that we can see replication in
our results and uh that would that would definitely
help with the conclusions that we can draw about
capuchin monkeys at least.
Mhm. And when it comes to the socio-ecological aspect
of all of these, I guess that another thing
to keep in mind is that it also means
that if you Uh, picked, uh, the exact, the
exact same males and females and put them in
other, in another socio-ecological context, they would probably behave
very differently, right? I mean, they would. Still be
capuchin monkeys with their capuchin uh biology and physiology,
but being exposed to other socio-ecological factors, the same
females and the same males would uh behave differently,
right? Yeah, um, I think, I think so. I
think it's possible that if you put picked them
up and put them down in a Totally different
environment, um, their behavior may change, but I think
there would be certain things if they were put
down in the environment with the same individuals around
them. I think their social environment would stay a
little bit more constant, uh, but You know, also
capuchin monkeys don't just stay necessarily in one social
position their whole life too, so that can change
about them as well, but there are certain things
that are constant like there will always be an
alpha male and an alpha female and the alpha
male sort of. Has say over even the a
female and there are certain things that would stay
the same, but you're right, um, if they, they,
they also exist in in a fluid environment and
so they're always um There's potential for change, but
um, I think certain things would also maybe stay
the same if I'm understanding your question correctly. Yeah,
yeah, yeah, no, and, and by the way, how
much sexual dimorphism do we find in capuchin monkeys
specifically? I mean, in terms of their anatomy, for
example, because I was wondering if that would also
play a role in perhaps some of these uh
sex differences in the brain or not.
Um, SO yeah, capuchins show a moderate amount of
sexual dimorphism. They're not the most extreme example of
that in primates, but males typically have a larger
body size than females. Um, THEY have larger canines
in adulthood, so their teeth are a lot bigger
than females. Um, THEY have higher testosterone levels in
adulthood, um, males do than females, um. So yeah,
there's, I would say they have a moderate amount
of dimorphism between males and females, um. Humans have
far less between males and females. Um, THERE'S some
obvious things, of course, but Uh, I would argue
that capuchins are have moderate sexual dimorphism. Mhm.
Yeah, I mean, I mentioned that also because in
conversations I had on the show with people that
come from different perspectives for uh still from an
evolutionary perspective, but they have different readings of the
literature. And many times sexual dimorphism comes to the
table and Um, I mean, I've had conversations with,
for example, Doctor Austin Fuentes, an anthropologist from Princeton,
and they mentioned the fact that Uh, on average,
there's only, uh, males in humans are 15% bigger
than females on average. And so it's a relatively
small sexual dimorphism and uh, that, that also matters
when it comes to really, I mean, coming up
with evolutionary accounts of sex differences in humans and
other species.
Right. Yeah, that's that's interesting. I, I don't know
percentage wise what the difference would be, but that
is a good question and would be interesting to
know in relation to other species too, uh, and
maybe someone does know out there. I, I just
don't know myself, but I know that there are
enough differences that um. Typically, at least in adulthood,
you can tell when it's a male versus a
female because it's just like things like body size,
um, like face with like that, um. But yeah,
there's there's enough dimorphism that enough to suspect that
there could also be differences in the brain because
there may have been selection on those sex differences
in body morphology and behavior that may have changed
the evolution of the brain, so, um, but yeah,
I, it's less dras or sorry, it's more drastic
than what we see in humans where I think
there's less um on average.
Mhm. And just to go back to an earlier
point you made just for me to see if
I get it right. So, in the brains of
humans compared to the brains of capuchin monkeys, for
example, the areas where we tend to find sexual
dimorphism in humans, the, uh, it's, they are more
overlapping. I mean, the distributions between males and females
overlap more than in capuchin monkeys, correct.
Yeah, we found effectively no overlap in the areas
that we saw differences. There were no like overlap
in ranges between males and females, but that's not
the case in humans. In humans we definitely see
overlap. Mhm.
And I guess that, uh, I mean, this will
be my last point about this, uh, topic, but
I guess that's another thing to keep in mind
here is that we are also studying usually the
brains of, uh, adults, right? And the brains of
adults are brains that have already gone through development
and life experiences and, uh, unique experiences that individuals
have and all of that. So they have already
been exposed to lots of different Environmental factors. So
again, uh, picking on those sort of uh imaging
studies, for example, to make a case that if
we find average differences between males and females, they
are, it's because they are in a, uh, I
mean, there's not much uh a basis to support
that,
right? You mean in pre-adulthood, so in, I mean,
I,
I
mean,
I, I, I was mentioning the fact that most
of the time we study, at least in humans,
the brains of adults, right? We, we have already
undergone development and been exposed to lots. Of environmental
factors during their life,
right? Yeah, yeah, and then adults, of course, have
experienced more of the social aspects of being human
and cultural aspects of being human that may have
affected their brain by that point. Um, BUT yeah,
I don't know in, in children, I'm not sure,
I'm not as familiar with that literature about whether
we would see what the sex differences would look
like in kids who have theoretically been exposed to
less of that at that stage in their development.
Uh, YOU know, I also don't know about this.
I was just commenting on those. So, uh, uh,
so, uh, just before we finish, would you like
to tell people, uh, what kinds of things you're
working on at the moment and what you're going
to work on in, in the near future?
Oh yeah, sure, um, so actually I have added
a model species to my research repertoire. I'm now
working with dogs and um using um actually the
domestic dogs, so pet dogs as a model of
How selection for behavior could have shaped the brain,
um, and, and one of the projects that I'll
be working on is looking at, um, so I
was talking about earlier how oxytocin is important in
social attachment formation. So I will be looking at
um what social attachment between children and pet dogs
looks like um on a hormonal level but also
in the brains of children. And their pet dogs.
Um, SO that's, that's one of my upcoming research
directions that I'll be working on, and it sort
of relates to some of the work I've done
in the past, um, looking at how, um, in
the capuchin monkeys social support, um, Maybe be related
to stress buffering, so, um, an increase in oxytocin
or social support, uh, may reduce stress and using
cortisol, which is another hormone, um, sort of as
a metric for that. And so now I'm taking
that idea and looking at this in kids and
their pet dogs to see if Having a pet
dog can sort of reduce stress for a child,
but also we don't know much about the dog
side of that partnership. Um, WE know that dogs
can be therapeutic and have a lot of um
beneficial outcomes for kids, and we also know that
the Likelihood of these benefits occurring may be contingent
on the level of social attachment, so how strong
their social bond is between the child and the
dog, um, but what we don't know is how
the dog is affected by all of this, so
we're gonna try to look and see um how
the dog's brains may or may not have changed
in response to this sort of bonding and in
addition to the kids.
And so, and do you already have any hypothesis
on the table? I mean, do you expect, for
example, for there to be changes in levels of,
of hormones like oxytocin, uh across species in this
case?
Yeah, so we're planning to do a sort of
behavioral task that actually started again um in the
parent infant literature, but has since been modified for
use with dogs, but it's called the strange situation
test, so it's essentially a Test battery of different
um conditions uh that are meant to induce some
sort of stress like a separation from The social
partner for a few minutes and then a reunion
with the social partner and um introduction to a
lesser known individual that might be stressful um and
then a reunion again and so all of these
different conditions. And the way that the dogs and
the children respond to them can give us an
idea of what the attachment looks like between the
dog and the child, and we can also Um,
measure changes in hormone samples during certain conditions, like
you mentioned, oxytocin. So, um, we might expect to
see change elevated oxytocin, uh, after a reunion phase,
for instance, um, and maybe a reduction in stress,
so, uh, less cortisol after that point. So we're
hoping to be able to measure those hormones during
these interactions as well, yeah.
Well, perhaps we'll learn more and have a better
understanding of what our dogs go through when we
leave them at home to go to work.
Yes, perhaps.
OK, so where can people find you and your
work on the internet if they are interested?
Uh, YEAH, so I, I should have a website
that is more formal, and I do not at
the moment, but I'm working on that. But, um,
right now I am a member of the evolutionary
neuroscience lab in the human evolutionary biology department at
Harvard, and so, um, if you check out that
website in Dr. Erin Hecht's lab, um, you can
find more information about my work and also that
study um that we're working on right now, so.
Um, AND I also have a an ex account
Twitter. Um, THAT I, I try to keep updated,
but yeah, so you can check out those spots
for some more information.
OK, so I'm leaving links to that in the
description box of the interview and Doctor Riley, thank
you so much again for taking the time to
come on the show. It's been fun to talk
to you.
Yeah, thank you so much for having me. This
has been great. I appreciate it.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullern, Fredrik Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alexandam Castle, Matthew Whitting Berarna Wolf, Tim Hollis, Erika
Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the Matter
Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Neevs called Holbrookfield governor Michael
Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnseroro and Hal Herzognun
Macha Joan Labrant John Jasent and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan
Wilson, asilla dearauujurumen ro Diego Londono Correa. Yannick Punterrumani
Charlotte blinikolbar Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine, Gary Galman
Sam of Zallidrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fre Franco Bartolotti Gabrielon Corteseus
Slelitsky, Scott Zachary Fitim Duffyani Smith John Wieman. Daniel
Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianeau, Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous,
Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the Augusta, Anton
Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier,
bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo. Sterry
Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Gray Zigoren, Jeff McMahon,
Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke
Neeson, Chris Tor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki,
Linda Brendon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin
Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Hubbert, Liam Dunaway,
BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursulauddinov, Gregory
Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos
Net. A special thanks to my producers. These are
Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffini, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis
Dixon, Benick Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin,
Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden, and
to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan
Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.